In this lecture
I'll be talking about taints and tolerations.
In the previous lectures, I explained to you
the following concepts.
Node affinity, which is similar to the nodeSelector,
interpod affinity and anti-affinity,
and the next concept, tolerations,
is the opposite of node affinity.
Tolerations allow a node to repel a set of pods,
so instead of using node affinity to make sure
that pods run on specific nodes, this is the opposite.
We can say that pods cannot run on these nods.
Taints mark a node, and tolerations are applied to pods
to influence the scheduling of the pods.
I'm going to talk about taint and tolerations.
Taints are applied to a node,
and tolerations are applied to a pod.
One use case for taints is to make sure
that when you create a new pod,
they're not scheduled on the master.
When you run a cluster that has more than one node,
the master has a taint, and the taint that the master has
is called the node-role.kubernetes.io/master,
and the type is NoSchedule.
Because this master has a specific taint,
you can only schedule on the master
when you have a toleration applied to your pod.
And by default, you don't apply any tolerations.
So, by default, you will not schedule on the master,
you will schedule your pods on your nodes.
If you still want to schedule on the master,
you can add a toleration,
or you can remove this taint as well.
To add a new taint to a node, you can use kubectl taint.
For example,
kubectl taint nodes node 1 key=value:NoSchedule
will add a taint to a node.
You can specify key=value.
The key and the value you can specify yourself.
This taint that is applied to the master
doesn't have a value, it just has a key,
the node role kubernetes io master.
The taints applied by kubernetes don't have a value.
So, at this point, if you apply this taint,
no pods will be scheduled on this node, on this node1.
This will make sure that no pods will be scheduled on node1
as long as they don't have a matching toleration.
The toleration needs to match this key= value.
The following toleration would allow a new pod
to be scheduled on the tainted node1.
This toleration you add to the pod specification,
it has the key, key; the operator equal;
and the value, value; and the effect NoSchedule.
So, this matches the previous taint that I created on node1.
So, if you would create a pod or deployment
that uses this pod specification,
then this pod could be scheduled on node1.
You can use the following operators.
Equal, providing a key and value, as an example above.
Or exists, only providing a key,
checking only whether a key exists.
Just like affinity, taints can also be a preference,
or soft, rather than a requirement.
NoSchedule is a hard requirement that a pod
will not be scheduled unless there is a matching toleration.
PreferNoSchedule, kubernetes will try
and avoid placing a pod that doesn't have
a matching toleration, but it's not a hard requirement.
So, it's exactly the same as with affinity,
just the naming is a bit different.
If the taint is applied while there are already running pods
these will not be evicted
unless the following taint type is used.
NoExecute will evict pods with non-matching tolerations.
So, if you apply a taint using a type NoSchedule,
then current running pods will not be evicted.
If you used NoExecute, then pods that are already running
will be evicted.
When using NoExecute, you can specify
within your toleration how long the pod can run
on a tainted node before being evicted.
Let's say you have a pod with the following toleration.
It's the same as the previous toleration,
but here the effect is NoExecute,
and the tolerationSeconds is 3600.
So, this specification will make sure
that if a taint is applied to a node
where the key is key and the value is value,
then this pod will run for 3600 seconds more,
and will then be evicted.
If you don't specify tolerationSeconds,
the toleration will match
and the pod will keep running on the node.
So, if you don't specify these tolerationSeconds,
then it always matches
and the pod will just keep on running,
just like a normal matching rule.
In this example, the toleration will only match
for one hour, 3600 seconds, after that,
the pod will be evicted from the node.
So, it's a bit difficult to understand maybe.
If you specify the tolerationSeconds,
then the pod will be evicted after this time,
if the toleration matches.
If you don't specify tolerationSeconds and it matches,
then it will always be there,
it will not be evicted after a certain amount of time.
And, of course, if it doesn't match,
then it will be evicted immediately.
Some example use cases are,
the existing node taints for the master nodes,
as I explained.
You don't want to be scheduling anything
on the master nodes, those have their own function.
Taint nodes that are dedicated for a team or a user.
Let's say a team or a user has a specific node
that only he or she can use, then you can also use taints.
If you have a few nodes with specific hardware,
for example GPU's, you can taint them to avoid running
non-specific applications on those nodes.
Depends what the easiest is for your use case,
you can use affinity, or you can use the opposite,
which is taint.
An alpha, but soon to be beta, feature
is to taint nodes by condition.
I'm doing this lecture when version 1.11 is already out,
and this feature didn't make it.
So, it's still an alpha now,
but in one of the next versions, it will be in beta.
So, the taint nodes by condition
will automatically taint nodes that have node problems,
allowing you to add tolerations to time the eviction
of pods from nodes.
So, this is a very specific feature.
A node problem example can be
that there is no disc space left anymore,
so then this node will be tainted,
and you can time the eviction of the pod from the node.
You can enable alpha features by passing the --feature-gates
to the Kubernetes controller manager,
or, if you are using kops,
you can use kops edit to add to add the following lines.
So this feature can be enabled
by TaintNodesByCondition true,
but I would recommend you to maybe just wait
until this feature is stable,
and then you can just use this feature.
In the next slide I will show you a few taints
that can be possibly added when you enable this feature,
and then you can create tolerations for those.
So, here is an example of a toleration that could be used.
Toleration, if it is node.alpha.kubernetes.io/unreachable
key exists, then the effect will be NoExecute,
so it will evict all the pods on this node.
But you can say, "I want only to be evicted
after 6000 seconds."
Because maybe if you cannot reschedule a pod,
it will take a lot of time,
so sometimes it is better
to wait some more minutes to be evicted.
If it is reachable again, then no work needs to be done.
You have the node.kubernetes.io/not-ready,
a taint that can be applied when the node is not ready.
Unreachable when the node is unreachable
from the node controller.
Out-of-disk, the node becomes out of disk.
Memory-pressure, the node has memory pressure.
Disk-pressure, the node has disk pressure.
Network-unavailable, the node's network is unavailable.
Currently this is only the host network.
Unscheduable, the node is unscheduable.
So these are the taints that are applied on those nodes,
and then you control the eviction time
by using these tolerations.
In the next demo, I will show you
how these taints and tolerations work in practice.